# Exercise 4: Auditing 

Some helpful resources:

[Checklist for AI
Auditing](https://www.edpb.europa.eu/system/files/2024-06/ai-auditing_checklist-for-ai-auditing-scores_edpb-spe-programme_en.pdf)

[Singularity AI Card
Game](https://www.thoughtworks.com/content/dam/thoughtworks/documents/blog/machine-learning-and-ai/tw_blog_singularity_card_game.pdf)

[AI Audit Card
Game](https://www.media.mit.edu/publications/ai-audit-card-game/)

## Part 1: Audit Your Algorithm

In Exercise 3, each of your groups wrote your own algorithm to do some
city planning to identify which populations will get the right-of-way at
an intersection. Some of you may have chosen to always prioritize
emergency vehicles while others may have always let the pedestrians go
first.

**Question 1:** Now, take a minute and run your algorithm again. It
should output the 25 randomly selected scenarios. Please paste these
scenarios and choices below. For each one, please indicate whether you
agree with the choice your algorithm made or not. This does not have to
follow the decisions you made previously.

**Question 2:** Who benefits the most from your algorithm's decisions?
Who might be harmed or systematically disadvantaged? How could this
problem have been framed differently? Who might prefer a different
framing?

**Question 3:** How explainable is your algorithm to the people it
affects? Use this space to write up a press release about your algorithm
to announce it to the community in which it's going to be implemented.

## Part 2: Audit a Random Algorithm 

The community isn't happy and has called a town hall. They are
challenging your algorithm - maybe it doesn't help those who have the
loudest voices in the community or maybe it's systematically harming
specific populations of people. The community has now asked you to audit
several other algorithms to ensure that what you've proposed is truly
the best for the community.

**Question 4:** Use Google to randomly select a number between 1 and 8.
Run the algorithm for the number you randomly selected. Paste the
scenarios below and like for your algorithm above, go through each
scenario and identify whether you agree with the choice.

**Question 5:** How many of the 25 choices did you agree with? Give this
as a percentage.

**Question 6:** What do you think the software engineers of this
algorithm were prioritizing? What assumptions did they make about who
matters most in this community?

**Question 7:** Is there any type of relevant data that is excluded from
the algorithm? What might you want to be included? Do you think anything
was intentionally excluded?

## Part 3: Reframe Your Algorithm

After auditing another algorithm, you now have a better understanding of
how other models might make these choices for your community.

**Question 8:** You've decided to make some changes to your algorithm -
maybe you've decided to add another category or include another edge
case. Describe the changes below.

**Question 9:** Try to implement these changes in your code. Paste a
copy of the code in the space below.

## Part 4: Funding Audits

The city council is now considering adding another automated
decision-making tool -- an AI system to decide which communities receive
infrastructure funding. The algorithm uses data on complaints to city
hall by each community, income levels, previous investments, and
population density to decide how to allocate a portion of this year's
budget across the city.

Several members of your community are worried especially after the
debacle with the intersection automation. Your task is to audit the
funding allocation algorithm and report these findings to the community
and city hall.

**Question 10**: Take a look at the first algorithm, who seems to
benefit the most from this funding algorithm? What patterns do you
notice in which neighborhoods are prioritized?

**Question 11**: What kinds of data does this algorithm rely on? Is
there any relevant data missing?

**Question 12 + 13:** Now look at each of the other two models. Briefly,
explain for each what these models seem to prioritize.

**Question 14:** Let's say your community is Elm Heights, which model
would you choose to benefit your community best? Is this the best model
for the entirety of the city?

**Question 15:** What would you say to City Hall to convince them to
pick one model over another? What model would you recommend to the city
council?
