# Exercise 5: Communicating Results

Group Members:

## Part 1: Basic Visualizations 

(60 points) We're going to start by thinking through how we might
visualize our class survey data. Please move over to the GitHub
repository: <https://classroom.github.com/a/4_XPjqdx>

Work through the seven questions in the Jupyter Notebook. Paste your
figures here and for each write a one-two sentence summary about what it
shows.

**Questions 1-7**

**Question 8:** Paste your figure for question 4 here and write your
summary.

**Question 9:** Paste your figure for question 5 here and write your
summary.

**Question 10:** Paste your figure for question 6 here and write your
summary.

**Question 11:** Paste your figure for question 7 here and write your
summary.

[Please download your Jupyter Notebook and upload it to Moodle with this
document.]{.mark}

## Part 2: Visual Narratives 

Check out the visualizations for the listing of [Executive Orders since
2002](https://ampivirotto.github.io/ExecutiveOrderVisualization/) and
the [Longest Solo Speeches on the Senate
Floor](https://ampivirotto.github.io/BookerVisualization/).

Pick one of these two visualizations for this part of the exercise.

**Question 12: (5 points)** What narrative or story is the author of
this visualization trying to tell?

Consider what an analyst might be able to do with colors, legends, and
other visual elements such as pop-out secondary figures, text bubbles,
and more.

**Question 13: (5 points)** What's one thing this visual narrative does
well and what's one thing it does poorly?

**Question 14: (10 points)** Go to the repository for your chosen figure
([Booker](https://github.com/ampivirotto/BookerVisualization) or
[Executive
Orders](https://github.com/ampivirotto/ExecutiveOrderVisualization)).
Fork the repository and enable GitHub pages (under the setting tab) and
try changing one thing in the figure. Ask me if you need help figuring
out where something is to change!

**Question 15: (20 points)** Please propose your own visualization of
the same dataset you picked. Maybe you'd like to change the type of
visualization completely, that's okay. Please use this space to explain
as thoroughly as possible. You're also welcome to sketch something out
and upload a picture here.
